----

1 - Banks, Blundell, and Tanner (1998). Is There a Retirement-Savings Puzzle?
2 - Bernheim et al - Uses PSID to document retirement consumption puzzle
3 - Aguiar and Hurst - Consumption versus Expenditure
4 - Aguila Attanasio Meghir _ Changes in Consumption at Retirement Evidence from Panel Data
5 - Hurd and Rohwedder - Heterogeneity in spending change at retirement
6 - Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst “Consumption vs. Expenditure”, Journal of Political Economy, 2005.
7 - Pagel
8 - Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun “Are Americans Saving “Optimally” for Retirement?”, JPE
9 - Blundell, Pistaferri, Saporta-Eksten "Consumption Inequality and Family Labor Supply"





----

To read later:

Hurst, Erik, and Frank Stafford, “Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and Household Consumption,” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 36 (2004), 985–1014

----

2 - Bernheim et al - Uses PSID to document retirement consumption puzzle

Bernheim, D., J. Skinner, and S. Weinberg, “What Accounts for the Variation in Retirement WealthAmong U.S. Households?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 91, 2001, 832-857.

The primary data sample for our analysis consists of the set of all households
surveyed in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) with a transition to
retirement between the years 1978 and 1990. We define nonretired households to
be those with at least one member (head or spouse) working more than 1,500
hours annually. We define a household to be retired if no member works more
than 500 hours annually in the current year, or in any subsequent year for
which data are available.

We restricted the sample to households with transition periods of less than
five year

3,500 observations on 430 households

----

4 - Aguila Attanasio Meghir _ Changes in Consumption at Retirement Evidence from Panel Data

Uses CEX. This allows you to observe each person for four quarters. Finds a drop in consumption in food, but no drop in consumption in overall expenditure (during the year that you retire)

What if the drop in consumption only starts more than a year after you retire? That would be consistent with a temptation story. During the first year of retirement, you might still have enough to consume as much as you want

They look at the household consumption response to the head of household retiring.

----

5 - Hurd and Rohwedder - Heterogeneity in spending change at retirement

We begin with 439 retirement transitions among 50 to 70 year-olds where the
responses to the question ‘‘Are you retired?’’ indicate a transition from not
retired to retired. We impose the additional restriction that the respondent
remained retired in the following wave if the respondent is observed in that
following wave


----



7 - Pagel retirement consumption puzzle:

Finally, we use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data from 1968-2015.
The PSID is a nationally representative survey of households in the United
States conducted by the University of Michigan. From 1968-1997, the PSID was
administered annually, the PSID switched to a biennial survey format post
1997. We follow Addoum (0) and extract consumption data from years prior to
1997 and household finance data post 1997. Moreover, we follow the literature
and use household food expenditures, the sum of food consumed at home and
away, as a proxy for consumption. Because the PSID surveys households
consecutively, we can also include individual fixed effects in our
regressions. The results from the PSID analysis are consistent with our other
results. The coefficients on consumption are negative and significant
indicating that individuals consume less after retirement. Moreover, retired
individuals increase their balances in savings and checking accounts, which
corroborates our previous findings. Finally, individuals also hold more value
in stocks and their overall wealth increases with and without accounting for
equity. The results can be found in Table 12.

Why does Addoum do that??????



----



Sample Selection in "Consumption Inequality and Family Labor Supply"
Blundell, Pistaferri, Saporta-Eksten paper that uses PSID consumption data from 1999 to 2009
https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/67323/1/727547445.pdf

For our baseline specification we focus on non-SEO households with
participating and married male household heads aged between 30 and 65.
Whenever there is a change in family composition we drop the year of the
change and treat the household unit as a new family starting with the
observation following the change. We drop observations with missing values for
state, education, race, labor earnings, hours, total consumption and total
assets. We drop observations with wages that are lower than half the minimum
wage in the state where the household resides. Finally, we drop observations
for which consumption, wages or earnings of one of the earners show extreme
"jumps" most likely due to measurement error. A "jump" is defined as an
extremely positive (negative) change from t2 to t, followed by an extreme
negative (positive) change from t to t+2. Formally, for each variable (say x),
we construct the biennial log dierence 2 log (xt), and drop observation in
the bottom 0.25 percent of the product 2 log (xt) 2 log (xt2)

Before 1999, PSID collected data on very few consumption items, such as food,
rent and child care. However, starting in 1999 consumption expenditures data
cover many other nondurable and services consumption categories, including
health expenditures, utilities, gasoline, car maintenance, transportation,
education and child care. A few other consumption categories have been added
starting in 2005 (such as clothing), however we do not use these categories to
keep the consumption series consistent over time. The main items that are
missing are clothing, recreation, alcohol and tobacco

While rent is reported whenever the household rents a house, it is not
reported for home owners. To construct a series of housing services for home
owners we impute the rent expenditures for home owners using the self reported
house price.20 We then aggregate all nondurable and services consumption
categories to get the household consumption series.21 Descriptive statistics
on the various components of aggregate consumption (nominal values) are
reported in Table 1. A comparison of the main aggregates (total consumption,
nondurables, and services) against the NIPA series is oered in Table 2. As
shown in Table 2, taking into account that the PSID consumption categories
that we use are meant to cover 70% of consumption expenditure, the coverage
rate is remarkably good.

[20] For our baseline measure we approximate the rent equivalent as 6% of the house price. See Poterba and Sinai (2008)
[21] We treat missing values in the consumption (and asset) subcategories as zeros.

Nondurables and services:
"including health expenditures, utilities, gasoline, car maintenance, transportation, education, and child care"

Consumption = Nondurable Cons + Services
Nondurable cons = food at home + gasoline
Services = food (away from home) + health insurance + health services + utilities + transportation + education + child care+ home insurance + rent (or rent equivalent)



----

Income, Consumption, and Leisure Inequality in the US, 1980–2010
Orazio Attanasio, Erik Hurst, and Luigi Pistaferri

Food consumption is the sum of food at home, food away from home,
and the value of food stamps. The post-1997 consumption measure (or
“70 percent measure” from now on) includes information on spending on
utilities (electricity, heating, water, miscellaneous utilities); home insurance
premiums; health (health insurance premiums, nursing care, doctor visits,
prescriptions, other health spending); vehicle spending (vehicle insurance
premiums, vehicle repairs, gasoline, parking); transportation (bus fares,
taxi fares, other transportation expenses); education (tuition, other school
expenses); and child care. To match the nondurable consumption definition
from the CE, we also consider an alternative measure that excludes spending
on education and health.

----

PSID Expenditure Data


To expand the coverage of expenditure data in PSID, a series of new questions
was added to the survey in 1999 to collect information regarding spending on
healthcare, education, childcare, transportation, and utilities. Li et al.
(2010) fnd that the PSID-measured consumption expenditures in these categories
match fairly closely to those measured in the CE and account for 72 percent of
total consumption expenditures measured in the CE.


----

QUESTIONS

Question for Cormac: has anyone looked at this issue using the Kilts Nielsen Household Panel data? Might be useful because of its very fine consumption data
Question for me: could I look for a drop in consumption around home purchase using Kilts Nielsen household panel?

----

Whats the right definition of nondurable consumption?
Whats the best way to define the transition to retirement? Look at head or spouse or both?
Whats the best way to define a household? Should we follow the household if the head changes?
What empirical method to use? Costas uses DID given two periods, but mentions it might be good to use IV if more than 2 periods

